# Goals and motivations

The general frameworks given in the literature for how to go through a gamification project largely mirror one of the approaches used in either user experience (UX) design or game design. Which is not surprising, since gamification would seem to be the bridge between the two fields.

>“User experience design and video game design are something like siblings who were raised in separate homes. It’s easy to understand both as forms of human-computer interaction and as centrally concerned with the design of experience. But UX design creates experiences that help people meet their real-world needs, whereas game design is about the experience for the sake of the experience.” (Ferrara 2012)

This section focuses on the issue of defining project objects, and the following section will cover user motivations.  These two seem to be the areas where the process of gamification diverges most from both of its parent fields, UX and game design. 

## Goals

Both Raftopoulos (2014) and Ferrara (2012) explicitly advise to start a gamification project by determining the goals for the system. But what those goals are&mdash;or at least what they should be&mdash;is not an obvious question. To begin with, how can you properly balance the goals of the organization and the goals of the users?

Often, the goals of the organization obscure the goals of the user, such as in the gamification of a university course, when “Our goal with gamification was to improve lecture attendance, content understanding, problem solving skills and general engagement. [These were] measured using course marks, lecturer evaluations, lecture attendance, and a questionnaire” (O’Donovan *et al.* 2013).  While improved marks are evidence that the users of the system, the students, benefitted from it, the inclusion of “lecturer evaluations” as an indicator of success implies that overall the goals were organization-centric.

Or the goals of the organization may simply ignore the goals of the user. “The language used by vendors selling gamification solutions imply that it is something performed on employees by management” in order to improve employee performance (Raftopoulos 2014), as opposed to something that assists, or benefits employees.  More so “gamification too often invokes organization-centered design, treating users as zombies: senseless mechanisms urged onwards by a desire for extrinsic rewards. Gamification still often fails to acknowledge the user’s context and innate psychological needs” (Conway 2014).

While the analogy to mindless zombies might be hyperbole, at least one example of gamification did treat its users as something like non-sentient beings. In order to gather data on the deployment of Near-Field Communication tags, researchers released what was ostensibly a game, but what it could also be argued was an application, with a heavy layer of gamification that obscured its objective and the core process. The researchers themselves described their project as using “gamification”, and reported that “most users are unaware of the game's purpose as a research project”.  In describing the process of deploying their application, they wrote that they “chose a neutral name for our game that did not disclose its nature as a research project, but did rather seem like a game of an independent development studio” (Kranz 2013).  The intentional obfuscation of the true purpose of an application is, if nothing else, putting the goals of the organization well ahead of those of the user.

Conversely, the goals of the user might be made superior to those of the organization. Some have recommended that “…meaningful gamification puts the needs and goals of the users over the needs of the organization”.  And while we are assured that “if users have a positive and meaningful game-based experience that is well-connected to the underlying non-game setting, then the organization will benefit in the long term” (Nicholson 2012), much like with the student's goals in the example above, merely ensuring that the organization benefits is not the same as ensuring that the organizational goals are serviced.

This confusion and conflict between user and organization goals is a consequence of trying to define goals for a gamified application as opposed to a game application.

Designers of games don't necessarily have an easy task in defining project goals, but it is at least a straight-forward one, since “the fundamental role of the game designer is to be the ‘advocate of the player’ and the designer must look at the game world that is being created through the eyes of the player and focus completely on the player experience without being distracted by the other concerns of production”. In contrast, “a gamification designer is often the advocate of management… and the role of the player or worker is fundamentally subordinate in the game that is being developed. The engagement and experience of the player in a gamified enterprise application is typically a means to an end…, rather than the end in itself…” (Raftopoulos 2014).

One way proposed to overcome the confusion and possible conflict between the goals of users and the goals of the organization in of a gamification project is to include users in the process of defining the project goals, and also by framing those objectives within a larger definition of project values&mdash;which users also participate in defining (Raftopoulos 2014).

Another possible difficulty in defining the goals of a gamification project occurs in case where the intended users of the system have a wide variety of goals. A proposed approach to resolving the problem of needing to accomodate a broad spectrum of user goals is to adapt the Universal Design for Learning from education, which is used to create courses that are appropriate for a wide range of students.  The basic approach is to break down the overall process into steps, and then to provide a variety of approaches for each step.  At each step, users can find the approach that works best for them.  In other words, there is no single path of progress through the system, and users can switch between paths along the way.  Developing these multiple pathways can increase design difficulty, but “opening up the design of the gamification to users of the system can help designers overcome that challenge” (Nicholson 2012).

So, again, a good way to ensure an appropriate inclusion of user goals in the project's goals is to include users in the process, or to deploy a system that allows users to customize and expand the system. 
