Gamification-paper/15-theory-motivations.md, before:

## Motivations

The promise of gamification is **motivation**&mdash;people will *want* to use the gamified application (Deterding 2012). However, the gamification literature has sparse coverage of motivation theory, and what it there is borrowed from other fields. One theory commonly used is self-determination theory, which is a work motivation theory that focuses “on the relative strength of autonomous versus controlled motivation” (Gagné and Deci 2005).  In self-determination theory, the strength of *autonomy* in motivations has a ‘very strong’ positive influence on work performance.

The sense of autonomy is strongest in “intrinsic motivations” that stem solely from an inherent, internal interest (Gagné and Deci 2005) or enjoyment (Ryan and Deci 2000) in an activity.

In contrast to intrinsic motivations are extrinsic motivations, which can have a wide range of strengths of autonomy. Extrinsic motivations depend on a contingency between an action and some external consequence, and based on the strength of autonomy they comprise, extrinsic motivations can be placed on “a self-determination continuum”.  The extrinsic motivations that are the least self-determined are referred to as “external extrinsic motivations”, while those that give the greatest sense of self-determination are referred to as “integrated extrinsic motivations” (Gagné and Deci 2005).

Since integrated extrinsic motivations are highly autonomous, they are largely indistinguishable in the amount of their influence on workplace performance from intrinsic motivations.  There are two ways that the two can be distinguished from each other: 1) integrated extrinsic motivations started out as external motivations, but over time have become integrated, and 2) integrated extrinsic motivations are not required to be enjoyable or interesting.

However, the second distinction is problematic.  A good example of why comes from gaming: 

> “[Being motivated by fun] doesn’t account for the nearly masochistic things people
are willing to do when playing a game. Many of the most popular role-playing games, for example, require players to fight the same enemies over and over again (and then again and again) to get the experience and loot they need to advance in the game. Players may spend dozens of hours in thousands of battles. So many games involve these kinds of endless repetitive actions that the gaming community has given it a name: grinding. This term is related to how we describe work we really don’t enjoy&mdash;as ‘a grind.’ So why do people pay good money to subject themselves to something that’s as unpleasant as the work an employer would pay them to do? This is a really big problem if your only explanation for why people play games is to have fun.” (Ferrara 2012) 

The players in the example are not motivated by some external consequence; their motivation is not an extrinsic one.  But if it's not an extrinsic motivation, then under self-determination theory it's an intrinsic motivation, and therefore should be interesting, enjoyable or in some other way pleasurable.  But ‘grinding’ through a game is not pleasurable; it's a grind.

More generally, it has been proposed that “[Intrinsic Motivation] theorists may have erred in embracing hedonism, the philosophy that pleasure motivates behavior,” and that “we may question whether [Intrinsic Motivation] theorists have exaggerated the extent to which certain activities really are pleasurable” (Reiss 2004).

On way to avoid the pleasure problem is to simply use only the location of the consequence that is motivating action as the distinguishing factor between intrinsic and extrinsic motivations:

>“Intrinsic motivation is intimately tied to the locus of control, part of one’s sense of autonomy. As we have discussed, external rewards can cause a shift in an individual’s sense of the locus of control, as moving away from the person towards the source of the reward” (Conway 2014).

But doing so misses an important point: if we drop the requirement for an intrinsic motivation to pleasurable, then what is the reason for people to engage in an intrinsically motivated action?  What is the internal consequence that is contingent on the action?

Borrowing from the field of Psychology, we can say that the internal consequence behind intrinsic motivations is the pleasurable feeling that results from the fulfillment of an intrinsic desire. “The satiation of each basic desire produces an intrinsically valued feeling of joy, a different joy for each basic desire. Loosely speaking, people behave as if they are trying to maximize their experiences of the 16 intrinsic joys” (Reiss 2004).  Fostering the fulfillment of an intrinsic desire will increase the related intrinsic motivation.

A shortened version of the table of intrinsic motives and desires provided in Reiss (2004) is included.  It lacks the “Animal behavior” and “Intrinsic feeling” columns, and the text of some of the “Motives” has been reworked.

**Intrinsic Motivation – 16 Basic Desires**
| Motive name       | Motive                                           |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Power             | Desire to influence, to lead                     |
| Curiosity         | Desire for knowledge                             |
| Independence      | Desire to be autonomous                          |
| Status            | Desire for social standing, for attention        |
| Social contact    | Desire for peer companionship, to play           |
| Vengeance         | Desire to get even, to compete, to win           |
| Honor             | Desire to obey a traditional moral code          |
| Idealism          | Desire to improve society, for altruism, justice |
| Physical exercise | Desire to exercise muscles                       |
| Romance           | Desire for sex                                   |
| Family            | Desire to raise children                         |
| Order             | Desire to organize, for ritual                   |
| Eating            | Desire to eat                                    |
| Acceptance        | Desire for approval                              |
| Tranquility       | Desire to avoid anxiety, fear                    |
| Saving            | Desire to collect, value of frugality            |

### Motivations in games

The problem with defining intrinsic motivations as being inherently pleasurable was highlighted with a description of players “grinding” through a game; in other words, the fact that games are not always ‘fun’ yet people play them anyway parallels the idea that not all actions prompted by internal consequences are pleasurable, yet people engage in them anyway.

People are intrinsically motivated to do non-pleasurable actions in order to fulfill some intrinsic desire.  Why are they motivated to grinding though a game?

Ferrara (2012) includes a discussion of some common player motivations, and how they relate to the games those people play.  He also has some examples of how games can be tailored to feed those motivations, by using certain game elements.  Those examples will be discussed in the following section.

Commit message:

Rework intro to 20-game-design-elements.md to mesh with re-written 15-theory-motivations.md.

Gamification-paper/15-theory-motivations.md, after:

## Motivations

The promise of gamification is **motivation**&mdash;people will *want* to use the gamified application (Deterding 2012). However, the gamification literature has sparse coverage of motivation theory, and what it there is borrowed from other fields. One theory commonly used is self-determination theory, which is a work motivation theory that focuses “on the relative strength of autonomous versus controlled motivation” (Gagné and Deci 2005).  In self-determination theory, the strength of *autonomy* in motivations has a ‘very strong’ positive influence on work performance.

The sense of autonomy is strongest in “intrinsic motivations” that stem solely from an inherent, internal interest (Gagné and Deci 2005) or enjoyment (Ryan and Deci 2000) in an activity.

In contrast to intrinsic motivations are extrinsic motivations, which can have a wide range of strengths of autonomy. Extrinsic motivations depend on a contingency between an action and some external consequence, and based on the strength of autonomy they comprise, extrinsic motivations can be placed on “a self-determination continuum”.  The extrinsic motivations that are the least self-determined are referred to as “external extrinsic motivations”, while those that give the greatest sense of self-determination are referred to as “integrated extrinsic motivations” (Gagné and Deci 2005).

Since integrated extrinsic motivations are highly autonomous, they are largely indistinguishable in the amount of their influence on workplace performance from intrinsic motivations.  There are two ways that the two can be distinguished from each other: 1) integrated extrinsic motivations started out as external motivations, but over time have become integrated, and 2) integrated extrinsic motivations are not required to be enjoyable or interesting.

However, the second distinction is problematic.  A good example of why comes from gaming: 

> “[Being motivated by fun] doesn’t account for the nearly masochistic things people
are willing to do when playing a game. Many of the most popular role-playing games, for example, require players to fight the same enemies over and over again (and then again and again) to get the experience and loot they need to advance in the game. Players may spend dozens of hours in thousands of battles. So many games involve these kinds of endless repetitive actions that the gaming community has given it a name: grinding. This term is related to how we describe work we really don’t enjoy&mdash;as ‘a grind.’ So why do people pay good money to subject themselves to something that’s as unpleasant as the work an employer would pay them to do? This is a really big problem if your only explanation for why people play games is to have fun.” (Ferrara 2012) 

The players in the example are not motivated by some external consequence; their motivation is not an extrinsic one.  But if it's not an extrinsic motivation, then under self-determination theory it's an intrinsic motivation, and therefore should be interesting, enjoyable or in some other way pleasurable.  But ‘grinding’ through a game is not pleasurable; it's a grind.

More generally, it has been proposed that “[Intrinsic Motivation] theorists may have erred in embracing hedonism, the philosophy that pleasure motivates behavior,” and that “we may question whether [Intrinsic Motivation] theorists have exaggerated the extent to which certain activities really are pleasurable” (Reiss 2004).

On way to avoid the pleasure problem is to simply use only the location of the consequence that is motivating action as the distinguishing factor between intrinsic and extrinsic motivations:

>“Intrinsic motivation is intimately tied to the locus of control, part of one’s sense of autonomy. As we have discussed, external rewards can cause a shift in an individual’s sense of the locus of control, as moving away from the person towards the source of the reward” (Conway 2014).

But doing so misses an important point: if we drop the requirement for an intrinsic motivation to pleasurable, then what is the reason for people to engage in an intrinsically motivated action?  What is the internal consequence that is contingent on the action?

Borrowing from the field of Psychology, we can say that the internal consequence behind intrinsic motivations is the pleasurable feeling that results from the fulfillment of an intrinsic desire. “The satiation of each basic desire produces an intrinsically valued feeling of joy, a different joy for each basic desire. Loosely speaking, people behave as if they are trying to maximize their experiences of the 16 intrinsic joys” (Reiss 2004).  Fostering the fulfillment of an intrinsic desire will increase the related intrinsic motivation.

A shortened version of the table of intrinsic motives and desires provided in Reiss (2004) is included.  It lacks the “Animal behavior” and “Intrinsic feeling” columns, and the text of some of the “Motives” has been reworked.

**Intrinsic Motivation – 16 Basic Desires**
| Motive name       | Motive                                           |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|
| Power             | Desire to influence, to lead                     |
| Curiosity         | Desire for knowledge                             |
| Independence      | Desire to be autonomous                          |
| Status            | Desire for social standing, for attention        |
| Social contact    | Desire for peer companionship, to play           |
| Vengeance         | Desire to get even, to compete, to win           |
| Honor             | Desire to obey a traditional moral code          |
| Idealism          | Desire to improve society, for altruism, justice |
| Physical exercise | Desire to exercise muscles                       |
| Romance           | Desire for sex                                   |
| Family            | Desire to raise children                         |
| Order             | Desire to organize, for ritual                   |
| Eating            | Desire to eat                                    |
| Acceptance        | Desire for approval                              |
| Tranquility       | Desire to avoid anxiety, fear                    |
| Saving            | Desire to collect, value of frugality            |

### Motivations in games

The problem with defining intrinsic motivations as being inherently pleasurable was highlighted with a description of players “grinding” through a game; in other words, the fact that games are not always ‘fun’ yet people play them anyway parallels the idea that not all actions prompted by internal consequences are pleasurable, yet people engage in them anyway.

People are intrinsically motivated to do non-pleasurable actions in order to fulfill some intrinsic desire.  Why are they motivated to grinding though a game?

Ferrara (2012) includes a discussion of some common player motivations, and how they relate to the games those people play.  He also has some examples of how games can be tailored to feed those motivations, by using certain game elements.  Those examples will be described in the later section on “Goals, motivations, and games design elements”.
